[MUSIC]
Hello and welcome back,
I'm Halden Williams.
In this video, I'm going to review some
academic theory that can help us better
understand how to develop effective
data visualizations in Excel or
across other tool sets.
As we've previously discussed,
effective data visualization
helps an audience analyze, understand, and
draw conclusions from summarized data.
Building on the principles
from our previous lesson,
let's add the following
recommendations for charting.
Less is more, your chart should
convey one message to your audience.
Communicating multiple concepts usually
results in tradeoffs in clarity.
Use titles and labels to give your
audience an understanding of your message.
You want your audience spending their time
exploring and thinking about your message
and the underlying data, not orienting
themselves to what they're looking at.
Use call-outs to highlight key messages
and direct the audience to findings.
Use color intentionally and
not for decorative purposes.
Less color is often better, this is
consistent with a fundamental principle
we discussed in an earlier video.
Understand constraints of your medium, how
will this graph be presented or printed.
If our visualization is printed in black
and white will that change the message?
One of the academic pioneers in data
visualization coined the term chart junk
to refer to any nonessential
information added to a chart.
A good test for your chart's effectiveness
is to try and remove an element from your
chart and assess if your audience
will still understand your message.
If they can, you should remove it.
Let's see if we can improve
the effectiveness of the example chart
by applying some of our new concepts.
Before we start, let's review
the message we're trying to convey.
This chart should communicate that Chicago
is the third most populous city in
the country in 2016.
On the screen we have a bar chart for
the population of major US cities,
in its current form,
the chart makes it much more difficult
than it should be to answer this question.
Let's see what we can do to make this
graph more intuitive to the reader.
To start, let's make all the bars the same
color, applying the concept of similarity.
There is no immediate benefit to
have each bar a distinct color so
changing them all to the same color
makes it easier for us to look at.
Next, let's examine the Y axis and
data labels.
Do we need both?
Probably not, furthermore, is there a
benefit in having the exact population for
each bar?
Or would it be to use some rounding here?
Let's try rounding to the nearest
100,000 for data labels and
remove the Y axis label.
This looks better, however we've removed
the scale and added rounded values.
So we need to ensure our
audience is aware of the scale.
We'll revisit this when
we update the title.
Now that we have data values and
no Y axis, let's remove the grid lines
as they no longer provide
any benefit in this example.
If your chart does require grid lines we
recommend using a light gray instead of
black as a grid line should not
be the focal point of the chart,
rather a guide to helping
the reader interpret the results.
This charts looking better already,
let's see what else we can do.
The order of the bars is
currently alphabetical by city.
Let's change the order so the cities
are organized by population instead of
alphabetically, as well as flipping our
chart orientation so it's easier to read.
Great, now that we've updated
the order of the cities,
let's review the title of the chart.
Population's not a complete title and
doesn't help the audience
understand what are looking at.
We can be more specific,
the title of the chart should convey
the primary conclusion succinctly.
Let's update the title to read, Chicago
is the third largest US city, 2016,
(population in millions).
There are few more elements
we can eliminate and
change around before
this graph is finalized.
Let's get rid of the border as it's
not contributing to the story.
The final touch will be to
highlight the focus of our message.
Since we are focusing on Chicago,
let's use the anomaly principle and
make that bar a different color.
And there you have it,
a much more effective graph.
Let's compare this to where we started.
You can see how we put some of
the charting concepts to work.
Telling a better story and
removing non-essential chart elements.
Similar principles can
be applied to tables,
as they're just a different
type of visualization.
Many times, a table can more elegantly
convey the primary components of
a data story without the added
distraction of needless visual elements.
Tables need to be a legible as possible,
some characteristics of a legible table
are displayed in this comparison.
Banded rows or columns allow for
easier distinction when matching and
reading across information.
Cell padding or adding a slight margin and
evenly distributing columns
when appropriate creates more space for
the reader, and enhances readability.
Creation of table should
follow similar fundamental
principles applied when
you're creating charts.
Data in tables should be organized in a
logical order based on the message you're
trying to convey.
And where appropriate round to allow for
easier comparison.
Now that we have seen effective charts and
tables, let's review some
classic charting mistakes.
In the first example, using a pie chart
when the data points are very similar.
It is difficult to draw a conclusion
from a pie chart with many slices
as we cannot easily
understand the variability.
An example of chart junk that should
be eliminated are charts with a third
dimension that communicate no information.
Another problem with a third dimension is
that it can skew the perception of viewer,
which should not be your intention.
Last and perhaps most importantly,
often times pie charts do
not convey conclusions which cannot
be effectively drawn from a table.
Further to the topic of
skewing data presentation
inaccurate scaling is another common
theme in ineffective charting.
It is important to remain consistent
while you're using a scale.
In this example, we can see how
the difference being called out is
grossly exaggerated with
the inaccurate scale on the left.
These two graphs show the same bars, but
clearly biased
representations of the data.
This is often referred
to as the lie factor.
Infographics can also be guilty
of the same inaccurate scaling,
differences in width and height that are
often results in visuals such as this one
are misleading to the reader.
While infographics are more interesting
to look at it's important to consider how
the message is coming across.
One final common mistake in ineffective
charting is poor, missing labels
while it's unlikely you would create
a chart with no labels at all.
It is common to see a title or
axis label missing.
Without this information the the audience
is forced to make assumptions,
some of which maybe correct,
some which maybe not.
Similarly ineffective is
including labels which are so
disconnected from the visualization itself
that they require multiple interpretation
steps to understand.
Take the guessing out of it and
use all necessary labels,
placed ideally as close to the value
they are associated to as possible.
This will also help ensure the reader is
getting the message you are trying to
convey without having
to exert undue effort.
The next videos in the course will move on
to the details of how to create some of
these charts, applying the principles
discussed, and rules of effective and
ineffective charting.
During the remainder of this week,
the courses will go through how
to build visualizations in Excel.
As we do this, keep in mind the more
advanced environments discussed earlier
will not be covered in this course.
Excel provides a lot of flexibility to
practice building visualization and
serves as a foundation for
more advanced data visualizations to come.
[MUSIC]